# Sync (Continued) and Scheduling 

### Review
* Readers/Writers problem 
  * `(readers == 0 && writers == 0) || readers <= 1`
* Sync
  * Critical sections need to be protected. You also want a small amount of critical section. 
  * These can be locked with data belonging to a specific lock id. 

### Sync (Continued)

##### Dining Philosophers example
* 5 Philosophers with a bowl of spaghetti with a fork. They need to eat with 2 forks and there is one fork on each side of them at this circular table. Goal is to allow people to eat everytime they want to (within reason)
* _Semaphore Solution_
  * Simple solution: acquire locks on each fork, then eat, then release locks, and then think
  * Cons
    * Could be dead lock (every philosopher wants to go to eat for example)
    * You would want to release locks in the order acquired, but the ordering here is relative (since we are in a circle)
    * You can create an order by always grabbing left then right, except one person who gathers right then left. 
* Semaphores are a mechanism for sync but is complex and can be difficut to debug. 
* __Monitors__ High level programming language construct (abstraction) with programmer defined methods to execute on mutual exclusion. It contains shared data shared among threads and access through a condition variable. Bounded buffer example used the full/emptieness of the buffer. 
  * A monitor is to a semaphore as a while loop it to a `goto`. 

### Monitors
Consists of a state and functions that allow access to the state and data. Here, you do not manually release locks or anything. 
* When not doing anything, you are in an idle state (thinking in the dining philosophers problem)
* When waiting, you are waiting on a signal (hungry)
* When processing, you are running. 
* Your functions consist of trying to enter the monitor, tring to exit the monitor, and testing for entry
* Entry
  * When attempting to enter, you set your self to waiting state and test entry. If entry fails, you then wait
  * When exiting, you set yourself to the idle state and then "test" the other things that might have waited on you
  * When testing, check if you are in wait state and the resources you need are not taken. If not, set yourself to running
    * Testing is done therefor in the monitor and implicitly protected
* The condition variables do not have a value. But you can signal and wait on the sempahores in the monitor. Except here, you always wait. You don't just take an action based on the value of a semaphore. Your functions are essentially wait and signal.
  * Signal "resumes" athread waiting on the condition variable. The waiting is in a wait queue. You can either signal all or 1. You may then want a `signal_one()` and `signal_all()` to take the benefits of them. 

### Scheduling
CPU is shared among all processes. We want scheduling because it allows us to share CPUs while increasing efficiency. The goal of CPU multiprogramming is to increase CPU usage, throughput, and support multiple users. __Multiprogramming__ is multiple processes executing on a single core. CPUs go in a CPU/IO burst, IE processes churn on CPUs then wait on IO and back and forth. 
* Tradesoff indiviual performance for system throughput. 
* _First Come First Serve_ (typical queue)
  * Problems include long jobs holding up the queue
* Determining scheduling algorithm, for this we need performance criteria. 
  * First think of CPU utilization (time exec / time overall where time overall is time exec + time idle + time overhead)
  * Next thinking of throughput (jobs per unit time)
  * Turnaround time (time elapsed to complete a job or time completed - time submitted)
  * Response time (time between job submission to job start)
  * Predictability (variance in job times)
  * Fairness (processes with the same prio have equivalent shares of CPUs
