# Scheduling

## Program 2 - microshell

##### Process Creation
* First handle `fork(2)`
* When doing `fork()`, the parent needs to wait on the child. 
* You will need to loop through all the pipes with special cases for first and last pipe sections since the first does not have a redirected input while the last one will not have redirected output 

##### File I/O Redirect
* First open the file with `open(2)` handling errors appropriately and get the fd. 
* File descriptors are indeces into an array relative to the process
  * 0: `stdin`
  * 1: `stdout`
  * 2: `stderr`
  * 3 and on: the index returned from `open()` (see `man 2 open`)
* When doing the `open()`, you would need to do it in the child (after `fork()`) but still in the shell
* On the child side of the code, you will need to prepare the child
* `dup2()` duplicates over a file descriptor implicitly closing the original fd 
* Then call `close()` to make sure to close the file
* The pipe inbetween processes makes the output fd become the input fd for the next command (ie nothing more than a buffer)

Make sure to create the pipe for the children before creating the children, then create the children 

## Exam
* Short answer and non quantitative
* Abstractions and trade offs (expect these! like user level vs kernel level) Also which solution would you take and why

## Lecture

##### Threads and Processes again
* Process is an abstraction of the running program to track resource allocation
* _Context Switching_ Changing the context of a processor via the stack. Each process has a user and kernel level stack
* In RT OS, there may be a static number of processes, however generally processes are more dynamically created
* Processes have an ancestral relationships (parents and children)
* Make sure to maintain fairness within scheduling (with some exceptions)

##### Kernel and Userlevel threads 
* _Question_ Where do we provide abstraction? Is the thread visible to the kernel? 
  * If the thread is visible to the kernel then it will provide abstraction
  * This makes sense (the JVM handles its own threads for example)
* Kernel threads are provided from the OS
  * These provide access to the hardware and requires system calls to access the hardware in kernel mode (ring 0?)
  * The switching into kernel mode, you have an interrupt either via syscall (sync) or IRQ (async) but this is overhead since it requires a full context switch (you have seen this, registers are pushed onto the stack)
  * Distinct lack of flexibility because code is in kernel (even though you have kernel modules?) 
  * However, you can handle I/O without stopping the entire app and you have parallelism

###### Differences:
* User threads: manage contexts within userspace
* Kernel threads: manage contexts within kernel space
  * Allows a processor to each thread if desired
* Processes: manage process images
* Solaris actually did a hybrid user and kernel threading (called lightweight processes)
  * User threading engine can choose which threads get scheduled onto one CPU while or have only one thread on a CPU.   * Useful when you want flexibility and low impact but this is complicated (tradeoff)

##### Scheduler Activations
__Problem__: You want to do some sort of parallel/concurrent programming so you must decide be kernel or user threads. Assuming you do not want processes, then you have to consider tradeoffs between user and kernel threads. However, kernel thread performance is inherently worse than user thread performance due to the syscall interface. But you also have a lack of OS support for user threading. You can have multiple threads per process per address space, ut the kernel is too large of a hammer for many purposes and kernel operations are an order of magnitude slower than userspace. Their solution was to design a virtual multiprocessor. OS here provides each user level thread system a virtual machine where the OS may change the number of processors allocated to it. 
* The kernel allocated processors to address spaces
* User threading system schedules threads on processors
* Kernel then notifies user threading system when the number of processors changes and when a user thread blocks
* Here the kernel's job is multiplexing

###### Scheduler Activation
* A vessel for running user threads, an upcall which notifies user threading system (async), and provide space in kernel for a blocked thread
