# Lecture Title Here

### Review
* What is the necessary condition to care about memory consistency? There must be multiple 
  copies that are not read only. 
* _Sequential Consistency_ a global sequence everyone agrees on
* _Atomic Consistency_ a global time when all reads occur happens 
  * This method is impossible and can not be guarenteed, as parallelism is already 
    implemented and such an action is oppressive for parallelism. 
* Sequential Consistency
  * You make a global order out of all the partial orders. This may mean delaying things a 
    bit while for some writes while you perform the operations. 

### Causal Consistency

##### Overview
You try to capture the flow of events by a causal relationship. This is a weakening of 
Sequential Consistency since it is not requiring a global agreement of sequence. You then
have to agree only on the causal realted events, instead of a complete sequence. The causal
related events are events that actually change the values? 

### Coherence (Cache Consistency)

##### Overview
Location relative weakening of sequenctial consistency. In sequenctial consistency, all 
processors must agree on the sequential order of all accesses. In Cache Coeherence, you just
have to agree on the access to each location. IE X is updated in this order and Y is updated
in this order. 

Example:
```
Processor 1: 1 -> x, read y = 0, 
Processor 2: 1 -> y, read x = 0
```

This would not have a possible Sequential Consistency order, or no order we can all agree. 
This is because you can not possibly read a 0 after writing a 1. This can be carried out by
sending a message to all caches to invalidate cache or to go ahead and update cache. 

### Weak Consistency
The difference between strong and weak consistency is that a weak consistency model has a 
hybrid model. Or in other words, you have memory access and syncronizations. A memory system
is weakly consistent if: 
1. accesses to synchronization variables are sequentially consistent
2. No access to a synchronization variable is issued before all previous data accesses have
been performed
3. no access is issued before previous access to synchronization variable has been performed

In otherwords, you dont sync on all variables, but just some. On those, you globally sync 
on. But in order to rationalize this, you have to fence off memory accesses until any 
modifications are complete to the variables. You can think of taking out locks on things. 
When releasing the lock, you have to make sure all changes are made. When you acquire a lock
you have to make sure you receive all the flushed changes. You can do a lazy or eager. 

### Memory Consistency Model Issues
* Unit of consistency is not always agreed upon. You can do cache line, pages, or variable
sizes. On smaller units, you have less sharing but also less false sharing. False sharing
occurs when you have a word updated in a cache line in a CPU while another cpu updates another
word in the same cache. This invalidates each other's cache even though you do not need to. 
Cache is based on lines, so this is possible. Tradeoffs on sizes is greater overhead, smaller
messages and more messages for smaller cache sizes. 
* Eager/lazy 
  * Copy on write is a lazy copy. Good when most of data are supurfluous. Bad when you are 
    constantly updating and reading in between. Eager is good for when updates and reads are 
    frequent with each other. 
* Hardware/Software: hardware is faster, but software is more flexible. 

# Filesystems
When deleting a file, you only unlink a file. WHen ref count drops to 0, then you can remove
it how you want. 
* _Delayed Writeback_ You do not write immediately. You write to page buffers. You can flush
  the buffers. Useful if the filesystem is not to a disk. Also useful to aggregate writes
  until you have plenty to send out. No need to write byte by byte.
* Second most important abstraction in the OS, more of a persistent storage. Basically a 
  bucket for data. #! magic number for a shell command. These FS are hierarchical.
  On Harddisks, you have DMA (Direct Memory Access) or you can program the memory to transfew
  directly to the device. 
* A major function of the fs is to map a file to a section of disk. The device driver works
  as a device driver worries about getting/putting blocks. The interface is still quite 
  generic. 

### Syscalls
* Primary syscalls are open/close/read/write/unlink/mkdir/rmdir/stat, etc 

# P4 - RAMFS

