# Filesystems

### Review
* You have a filesystem that contains a Super Block (sb), an area of inodes, and an array of blocks (and the sb exists in copies across the fs). 
* The fs is divided into blocks. 
* The inodes are statically allocated
    * The `mkfs` create the inodes on fs creation and that is the limit of files for the fs. 
    * you may run out of inodes but you are more likely to run out of space
* Inodes members
    * ownership
    * permissions
    * file type (regular, char, block, fifo, etc)
    * administative stuff (like timestamps)
    * size
    * table to data blocks

### Blocks and files
Blocks
* The kernel uses blocks to amortize IO so IO is more efficient. 
    * Better to collect a bunch of bytes for a single IO request vs an IO request/byte. 
    * You also have less overhead in managing files (you have a table pointing to blocks that make up the file. Imagine an entry for each byte vs each KiB or each MiB). 
    * Allows for file some fragmentation (which is bad for a long period of time). 
* Files are just a list of blocks, so you need to know the location and order of blocks
* The table contains N amount of block addresses that are X bytes wide (likely 4 B). Assuming 4 KiB block size, you have a limit of N * block size files. 
* __Pearl 5: Indirection__ One block can be used as a container for block addresses. So one of the N table entries points to an indirect block. However, you still get limited here. ANOTHER indirection! Layers of indirection allow large files

### Measurements of a Distributed File System
* The 1985 study showed fs have low throughput, short lifetimes, sequential access, and small page cache is extremely effective
* The 1991 used a cluster of 40 systems and had 4 file servers
    * Overall, IO demand was quite variant and not constant
    * ~88% of file access is read only, ~11% is write only, ~1% is RW
    * However, write byte sizes are larger than read byte sizes on average
    * Read-only access is dominated by reading the whole file
    * Write-only access is still dominated by whole file writes, but has a lot more partial sequential access that RO
    * RW is always random
    * __ Pearl: Optimize for common case__ optimize for whole file reads
    * majority of file sizes are small but the majority of the bytes in files are in the huge files
    * The majority of the files are open for a very small amount of time
    * Majority of the files exist for a small amount of time
    * Majority of file traffic hits page cache and filesystem cache

### A File is not a File
* Auxiliary files dominate, multiple threads perform IO, and writes are often forced, renames are popular, and DOC formatted files are modeled after a FAT filesystem, Frameworks influence IO
* At the beginning of a file interaction, you are likely doing a ton of tiny reads and write
