# Address Space

## Review from last class
#### Processes 
* __Process Image__ 
  * Abstract concept that makes up the process
  * PID, control info, execution context, and address space 
  * __Execution context__ what identifies the process on the CPU. Deals with the registers and execution stack

## Lecture
#### Address Space
* Every process has a virtual address (VA) space (which includes a mapping to a physical address space or PA) 
* VA space is typically larger than PA space (think VMS and RSS). 
  * VA space is typically very sparse
* Many processes can Map to the same PA space.  
* Memory is typically divided into 1/4 and 3/4 for kernel and userspace respectively. The addresses in userspace typically has code (static data) at the bottom of userspace, then the head above that which grows up. The other end of userspace typically is userspace stacks and grows down. (This is dated however). 

##### Virtual Memory 
* VM addresses are translated via the Translation Lookaside Buffers (TLB) and a Page Table. Both of these are OS constructs
  * The TLB is a cache for VM -> PM addressing
  * The actual translations reside in the Page Table which exist for each process
* In usermode, processes can directly access only VM/userspace memory, some processor resources, and non-privledged instructions to the CPU
  * Failures to map can occur via a non-existant address mapping or via read/writing to something you do not have access to. This can be seen via a _segfault_. 
  * Some registers are general purpose and can be manipulated, but some are privledged that can not be touched (like the register that holds the pointer to the Page Table). 
  * Some instructions can modify memory management which is not allowed in userspace
* All other resources can only be accessed through the kernel via the syscall interface to trap into he kernel. 

##### System Calls
* Sets a software trap (`0x80`) to call a syscall
* Need to set a trap because a syscall is a method of interacting with the kernel, so this requires a method of traversing from userspace to kernel space. Traps are this method of dropping into the kernel. Helps guarentee protection. 
* Why is a syscall more expensive than a basic function call? A system call requires a full context switch
* When throwing a syscall into userspace code, it throws in a function stub that help set up which syscall was placed in, the parameters required for that syscall, and `0x80` to indicate a trap (interrupt). This Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) then performs the kernel level version (for example, `fopen()` would cause `open()` to be placed into the code which calls the kernel level version of open, `do_open()`). 

##### Process State
* Processes are always in a state, New, Running, Waiting, Ready, and Terminated

##### Boot Process
* POST Power On Self-Test
* Loads the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) into memory meaning allowing to read/write devices and provides lowest level interface to the peripherals
  * Will perform tests on the systems then looks for a bootable device loading it into memory. Then passes control to the partition
  * The MBR is loaded for BIOS systems. Typically GRUB (GRand Unified Bootloader) in Linux whose basic function is to load a Kernel
* Boot loaders are flexible in that they can boot from different formats and OS's along with a shell for debug/conf
* After loading the Linux kernel, it starts the init process then kick off the services via the runlevel 
