# Synchronization 

### Review
* Critical section of code is protected by mutual exclusion, meaning only one thread is in the code at a time. 
* Mutual exclusion may not be enough so you may need to have more correct solutions. 
* Critical sections defined by the following: 
  * Mutual exclusion
  * Progress (don't just block, actually do something)
  * Bounded waiting (you will never get continually bumped from CPU time. You will eventually run)
* This can be implemented in hardware (Test and Set instruction)
* You can statically decide allocating resources or request them in the same order to prevent deadlocking
* You can also allocate lock hierarchically (in order to have lock A, you need to have locks a.1, a.2, etc)
* _Deadlock_: no progress is made. You can execute but will never make progress. You and someone else has a resource each other needs
* _Livelock_: you are making progress but you are still locked

### Classic sync problems and their solutions

##### Bounded Buffer
You want a producer and a consumer (or someone insert into and remove from the buffer). You will need these actions to be as independent as possible until full. 
* __Semaphore Soulution__
  * You can wait until the buffer is empty before unblocking (or the semaphore governing "empty" state indicates is empty)
  * Can be optimized so that consumers and producers do not block until either completely full or empty. You can consume while producing. 
  * This is a symmetric solution
* __Readers/Writers Problem__
  * Readers can count(readers) > 0 but you can not have any writiers. Alternatively, you can not have readers when you have a writer. You can not have multiple writers. 
  * For reading, you first grab a lock to increment the count of readers and then grab the lock to the area of data. If you can grab the lock for the data, then signal the count sem and perform the read. Then grab the count lock again, decrement the count, then signal both the count sem and data sem.
  * Here, readers have higher priorities. Readers can also stampede the locks. 
* You can also just spin waiting on a sem count. But this is a busy loop and waited resources. Likewise, the `sem++` and `sem--` are not atomic, and you can get interrupted in the loop itself. 
  * Busy wait can be good when the expected wait time is less than the cost of blocking and if the value waiting on it can change. Otherwise, blocking wait (like in the assignment)
* For blocking wait, simply queue and unqueue from a wait queue based on value. 
  * The problem is that the code is riddled with critical sections
* You can also just build a mutex on/in/around a sem. If you wrap the critical sections in sem with mutexes, then you do not have a critical section. Just make sure to not hold the mutex while blocking! Otherwise you can dead lock
