# Review

### What is an OS
* The two roles of an OS are manager and policeman (for example, you don't want everyone stealing resources too much but you need to facilitate access to them). 
* __Abstraction__ It hides complexity since you do not need to know all the fine details of something in order to interact with it (Python vs C)
    * Tradeoffs of abstraction: overhead (you have more indirection to accomplish the same task since you have to handle genericity) and abstraction inversion (when something simple is not exposed, so you have to implement the simple functionality with complex stuff)
    * Example: ada provided rendevous but you needed semaphores. 
* __Tradeoff__ maximize desired result by balancing its costs

### Kinds of OS
* __Microkernel__ Some kernel operations are delegated to userspace. These actions are in userspace and not privledged, but they may run as elevated user. A single operations required many traps but footprint is small. (Filesystem operations required memory, so trapping back and forth. 
* Nowadays kernels are monolithic kernels (all the funcitonality is in the kernel)

### Processes
* Processes can run as users or superusers. 
* They can be interrupted via an interrupt (a device interrupts a process), trap (handled the same as interrupt, but the CPU itself handles it) and signals (interrupting each other)
* Process address space: when mallocing, you `brk` which simply extends the heap


# Lampson: Hints for Computer System Design
KISS: Keep it Simple, dont generalize. Do one thing at a time and do it well. Perfection is reached not when there is no longer anything to add, but when there is no longer anything to take away. If in doubt leave it out. Exterminate features. Everything should be made as simple as possible. No one wants to learn your app. 
* Don't hide the power and leave it to the clinet. 
    * If the interface can be simple, flexible, and fast, allow the client to do whatever they want (semaphore in ada)
* Plan to throw one away: adding people to a project does not allow it to finish faster
* Keep secrets: It's ok to be secretive. An efficient program is an exercise in logical brinkmanship 
* Divide and conquer

