# Virtualization

### 

### VMM or Virtual Memory Monitor
AKA a _Hypervisor_, it multiplexes the hardware between mutltiple virtual machines. Here a virtual machine is the OS and its processes. Essentially the host does for guests what the OS does for processes. The OS abstraces the physical system into an abstract machine. The processes interface with the machine like normal and the OS multiplexes hardware it sees among the processes. The VMM just abstracts physical hardware into virtual machine. 

Essentially encapsulation. This offers the following:  
* different OS instances (windows and linux and different versions of each etc)
* Different environments (
* Resource sharing
* Isolation
    * Access: the same vm that has problems should not fuck up others
    * Performance: 
* Encapsulation (suspend, resume, migrate, etc)
* Hardware Independence  

Tradeoff? 
* Overhead of cost and complexity. 

##### How is it done? 
Most instructions are native. Privledged instructions can not run natively. These must be trapped and emulated. Along with this, the other operations that must be emulated must include accessing the processor state, state registers, the TLB, io instructions, etc

IBM was able to provide multiple users by literally creating a control process that would perform multiplexing. 

VMware came from Disco, a VMM for the RISC processors coming out. Simple things they did:
* CPU sharing via vCPUs. They each have a context and a state allowing switching between CPUs. Implementing multiprogramming! 
* Virtual Memory. The OS expects memory to start at 0 but at most 1 VM has page 0. Virtual Memory! Add a layer of indirection to allow multiple VMs to have the same "page 0"

### Hypervisor Types
Type 1: native/baremetal: a VMM that virtualizes things on it and acts only as a multiplexor (ESX, Xen, Hyper-V)
Type 2: OS hosted: a specific process handles virtualizations (Virtualbox, VMware Workstation, KVM)
Paravirtualization: Xen came up with paravirtualization. Here the OS is aware of the hypervisor or parts of the code that has specific actions based on knowing the host which allows getting around actual virtualization. 

### Virtualization Levels
__VMM__ the things that do the multiplexing.  
__OS Containers__ 
__Processes__ encapsulation of execution. You can extend this further with things like JVM. 

Tradeoffs: 
Security:  
Management
Overhead: VMM will have quite a bit
