# Interrupts

### Overview
* The idea is to alter the program control. The system jumps from the userspace program to something in OS, then back to userspace, but the userspace has no idea that the jump or return happened. 
* On procedure (function) calls, activation records of the functions are pushed onto the runtime stack. This stack frame contains the RIP and other registers. Then another frame is created for the next function. When returning, it will pop the frame off the stack and restore the registers. The x86 ISA names these `call{q}?` and `ret`. But these are for programs. Not interrupts per ce. 
* The OS throws in an `int` into the stack which uses a number that hashes into an interrupt handler list, which runs through its code and then `iret` for returning. 

### Interrupt types
* __SoftIRQ__
  * `INT` as seen on the stack and originates from the software
* Hardware Interrupts
  * Initiated from the hardware and originate from outside the process
  * Can be maskable or non-maskable (NMI) and are hardware specific
* Signals
  * Userdefined interrupts that allows us to create out own kind of interrupts. 
  * OS abstraction

### History of Interrupt Handling 
Back in the day, there were fast and slow interrupts. A quartz vibrates at a frequency and after certain amount of vibrations, the hardware registers a tick. Every ms, this generates an interrupt to update timers. This would be a fast interrupt. A slow interrupt is similar to receiving a network packet. In both of these, you need to react immediately, but one takes much longer and memory than the other. 
* In fast interrupts, we typically mask (disable) interrupts while in slow interrupts have interrupts unmasked (enabled).
* Because CPUs got faster, we divided interrupts as top and bottom halves.
  * Top interrupts are the fast interrupts which must fire soon with interrupts disabled and must be fast. 
  * With "too much" work, the remainder of the work is queued up in a bottom half and the interrupt returns. 
  * You work in the context of an interrupt meaning that you have to save and restore states. 
* The bottom halves are queued and scheduled (meaning that they canhappen in different orders and on different CPUs). 
  * Interrupts are typically enabled and and can block

### Representation of Interrupts
* _Interrupt Vector Table_
  * The vector is just an array
  * On any trap/interrupt/syscall, the OS takes control. A register holds the address of the interrupt table. 
  * The interrupt sent to the CPU will then take the interrupt number and hash into the interrupt table to call the respective interrupt handler 
* Because you can have just a number to hash into the table, you can "program" the interrupts.
* The context of the process needs to be saved, but the interrupt can not begin running on the userspace stack. 
* Design choices: 
  * One stack per interrupt, one stack per processor, or one per process. 
  * Linux chooses to have a per process execution stack. So every process has a userspace and kernel space stack. 
* Bottom half interrupts are executed in a "phantom" process that is a full fledged process but runs only in kernel code
  
### Process of an Interrupt
* The interrupt pushes the interrupt number onto the stack
* Jump to a common code (`do_irq`)
* `do_irq` acknowledges interrupt and optains a spinlock for the irq in question
  * This means that this irq will block until the other interrupt returns 
* Clear status bits and flags, then call handler
* On return, clean up

### Threads

##### Concurrency 
* active but not executing at the same time
* While the execution context is made private, the rest of the stuff is public between threads within the process. Including resources. 
* With multiple incoming channels, you can just represent the state of the system via a state machine 

##### Threads vs Processes
* Thread is an independent sequence of instructons running within a program

##### Cooperative vs Pre-emptive threading
* Cooperative aka non-pre-emptive (no interrupting) at the thread level
  * Switches context by voluntarily yeilding 
  * Quite simple implementation and threads have complete controls
  * No protection so runaway processes and deadlocks can't be stopped 
* Preemptive threads may be interrupted 

##### Userlevel vs Kernel threads
* Cooperative or preemptive (kernel defaults to preemptive)
* Within userspace, threads are faster (no user/kernel level crossing) and more flexible 
* Within kernel space, you can take advantage of parallelism and block on IO without blocking the entire application 

Sys% is the amount of time a process is executing in kernel mode
