Lecture 003: 2016-01-13
=====================

Review
--------
* Trap instruction: the way to go from userspace to kernel space
* Concrete machines are made up of CPU, MMU, interrupts, disks, TLB, supervisor mode, Network

Lecture
---------
**Trap**

* Overview
    * synchronous interrupt
    * EX) divide_by_zero errors. 
    * Typically meant to recover from that error
    * Can use for the system calls (trap into the kernel to accomplish a task)
    * Did not exist in the original iterations of things
    * Allows resource sharing such as the CPU
* Requirements of an OS
    * Scheduling CPU time
    * Sharing of resources
    * isolation (including between processes)
    * security/reliability
    * Flexibility/generality
* The OS is typically overhead in the sense that it typically performs operations that do not do what we need (allocating  a page of memory does nothing for calculating numbers)
* Abstract Machine
    * Processes
    * Files
    * Pointers and addresses
    * Heap (done via `malloc`) and Stacks
    * Sockets for communications
    * Signals (for interrupts)
    * Synchronization

Program 1
------------
**Threading Libraries** abstraction of execution. 

* The difference between 2 processes with 2 PCs and 2 processes with 1 PC is that the memory is shared in the threads. 
* Non-pre-emptive threads will only stop when it gives up control via `yield()` or `join()`. 
* `MyThreadCreate(void(*start_funct)(void *), void *args)`
    * creation of threads and it will put them on the queue
* `MyThreadJoin(MyThread thread)`
    * Will block a thread and wait for a the `thread` to terminate
* `MyThreadJoinAll(void)`
    * Blocks to wait on termination of all children
* `void MyThreadInit(void(*start_funct)(void *), void *args)`
    * This is called to initialize all of this. 
* Threads are always in running, ready, or blocked. 
    * Can run when on the front of the ready queue
    * Yielding places you into the end of the ready queue
    * Can block when waiting on a semaphore or waiting on a child thread to signal completion
        * When the semaphore is signaled/all children are done, the exit will take the parent from blocked queue to ready queue
        * There is a blocked queue for every thread and for every semaphore

Unix
-----
* Principles
    * simple elegance
    * File for everything
    * Small tools that work together. 
* Start of minicomputer allowed multiprogramming and affordability
* Came around by ATT. UNIX is a contradiction to Multics which was a massive project
    * Multics had a 3000-pg programmers manual before code was written
    * Started in 1963, Bell labs left in 1969 and it was sold by GE by 1970. Released in Oct 1969 but was missing features and buggy
* Multics did provide the following
    * Filesystem
    * Memory paging and segmentation
    * Dynamic linking
    * Process job control
    * Protection
* FS 
    * Hierarchy and directories
    * Flat file structure 
        * the "files" are pure binary and not managed by the system but rather by filesystem
        * Meaning no direct/random access. Only sequential
    * Linking allowed copying a file. Allows multiple names for the same file
* Need to read _The Cathedral and the Bazaar_



Ideas
------
* threads can have a count of children and inc/dec as they are created/joined
