# Real Time Processing

### Program 3 Overview
The connections are bidirectional after setup. You will need to setup the protocol. The overall steps are as follows: 
1. gather host information
2. create a socket
3. As the listener, bind and accept. As the sender, connect. 
4. Then read/write

## Lecture

### What is Realtime? 
EX: aircraft control, process control, thermostat
* Time is inherently part of the definition of correctness. Time in this case is a wall clock
* Correctness depends on both the execution and the timliness. A correct answer too late is a failure.  
_Deadline_ You have 2 types: hard (must be met) and soft (desired)
_Frequnecy_
* _Periodic_  regular interval to perform something (TVs have a refresh rate)
* _Aperiodic_ Recurrent but irregular (NICs have incoming packets but you never know when they are coming in)
* _Sporadic_ Unexpected recurrent and irregular (such as high load average)
 
Examples of periodic times:
A period 5, B period 7, C period 8

`A: 00--------05--------10--------15--------20--------25--------30--------35--------40--------45--------50`  
`B: --01------------08------------15------------22------------29------------36------------43------------50`  
`C: ----02--------------10--------------18--------------26--------------34--------------42--------------50`  

These are all parts of the same hyperperiod. The peak is when all all the processes fire at the same point. Here we have 26 opertions/tasks (these are each of the firings) over a total of 51 time periods ([00-50]). So 26 tasks / 51 time units, so 26/51 = .5 workload average. Median workload is 0 (since over half of the time periods are empty). 

##### Realtime Myths
* __Myth 1__ Realtime systems are about writing device drivers in assembly
  * ASM is not the panacea
  * applications are sufficiently complicated to warrant not writing in assembly
  * compilers are better. 
* __Myth 2__ Realtime systems is fast computing. 
  * Removing determinism, so it becomes more complicated. 
* __Myth 3__ Fast copmuters will make RT systems obsolete
  * The RT systems are becoming quite complex

##### Realtime OS characteristics
* fast context switch
* small size (minimal functionality, such as not CUPS)
* Fast interrupt handlers
* Modern RT OS have IPC and multiprogrmming (so you need locking mechanisms like sem and signals)
* Need predictability
  * Focus on optimizing `O()` performance. Then you need to set bounds. 
* Short term task scheduler 
  * Goal is to meet hard RT deadlines
  * Response time and fairness are __NOT__ goals 
* Task information
  * Ready time, or when should a task start (don't want to start too soon)
    * This might be known statically (compile time) or via interrupts (packets on the wire)
  * Completion time
  * Processing time (WCET)
  * Resource requirements
  * Prio
In order to ensure RT guarentees time stances, you can limit the scope by having fewer processes and services (target what exactly you are trying to do) or overbuild the system. However, you do not want to overbuild, so instead build for worst case. To measure how to build for worst case, measure utilization or mu which is Ci/Pi or CPU time for task i and the period of task i. This mu is very hard to get above .5. Very low mu means way overbuilt.  

##### Rate monotonic algorithm
Pre-emptive and dynamic scheduling of RT tasks (on a uniprocessor. extra work for multiprocessing)
Algorithm: 
* statically assign each task prio equal to frequency (inverse period or period(^-1)) so shorter periods or higher frequencies have higher prio
* This allows scheduling earliest deadline first. This is not a guarentee though

##### Static Scheduling 
* Research when things should fire and perform a ton of analysis
* The scheduling is done statically before execution 
* All tasks are scheduled before execution in so much that we understand when things will be scheduled beforehang. 
* Only works for time triggered events. So things like aperiodic events like NIC activity is not accounted for

### Conclusion
RT guarentees completion time.  
Problems:
* Interactions between processes
* Asynchronous devices
* Dynamic requirements/load

__Period__ Service time (lambda)
