# Synchronization

### Program 1
* `exec*()` runs the commands
* `args[0]` is at least guarenteed and is the name of the function being called
* `main()` can be rewritten as follows: 
  * `main()`
  * `main(int argc, char **argv)`
  * `main(argc, argv, envp)`: here you can pass the environment pointer

### Synchronization (Sync)
_Why do we care about synchronization?_ When you have concurrent processes/threads, you need to make sure that their order does not cause an issue with corrupting data. Or better said, you want to safeguard the code from multiple threads from accidentally corrupting data. Data and the corresponding code that could be corrupted is called __Critical Section__. 
* Code Segments that modify common (shared?) variables. The same source oculd be modified by different code segments.
* They may also update shared data structures (variables). 
* __Race condition__ When the outcome depends on the order of statements/instructions executed. These have conditions:
  * You must have concurrency (meaning active at the same time. Parallelism is when you have two processes running at the same time)
  * You must have shared data
  * You must have interference or at least one active process is updating data
* To resolve this, use _mutual exclusion_ (mutex! :D) or when a thread is in a Critical Section, no other thread should be in the same Critical Section
* You should also let a process progress
  * If no thread is in a critical section and no thread wants to enter, then the selection of the thread to enter can not be postponed indefinitely 
  * This allows the action to allow it to be lazy rather than greedy
* And you can allow bounded waiting a bound must exist on the number of times a thread is bumped 
  * IE you must eventually select a thread on the wait queue
So the three properties of a proper Critical Section are mutual exclusion, progression, and bounded wait. Typucally, the mutex is implemented like the following:
```c
while(true) {
    mutex_enter(id);
    my_critical_section_func();
    mutex_exit(id);
    noncritical_section_code();
}
```

### Synchronization Hardware
Typically, sync is easier at the hardware layer. On a single core system, simply disabling interrupts is fine (meaning code executes without pre-emption or interrupts). The kernel had only a huge lock back in the day and would stop all things from running during that time, but this is inefficient. If you had to disable interrupts, the code had to run fast otherwise the interrupts are disabled to long. Some arch had atomic instructions built in. 
* `tst` test and set a value in a register and set the value in the register
  `condition code := x`
  ` x := 1`
```c
lock(int *x) {
    while(TST(*x) == 1) {
        yield();
    }
}
```
* `csw` compare and swap

### Deadlock and Starvation
* __Deadlock__ When you have two or more processes for resources that can only be released by one of the blocked processes. 
* __Starvation__ is when a process is infinitely blocking or waiting and is never blocked
  * This is not deadlock (since this is just one process waiting) and this is not always bad

### Semaphores
__SMP__ Simultaneous Multiprocessing
